Here I hope to detail what a FTDI chip is and how we can use it to help me with this project. 

I currently have an FTDI cable that was given to me to troubleshoot as to why a certain OBD2 program was not working with it. 
VCDS is software developed by ROSS-TECH that reads and can code VAG (Volkswagen Auto Group) cars. ROSS-Tech designed their software 
so only those who purchase genuine ross-tech cables can use their software to its fullest potential. 

The FTDI chip, is a third party in the eyes of Ross-tech, and only the (lite) version of VCDS will work with it, still have to confirm 
this and see what changes are apparent. If I can still log data, we are making headway.

FTDI 
The FTDI chips implement the USB protocol stack. 
The responsibility of this hardware is to tell your PC what it is 
(using some identification information) such that your computer can load 
the right driver for it, and also to manage the data transactions with the 
PC there-on after - look up USB endpoints for a better explanation of these processes.

Once those drivers are loaded, this would specify a command set that your PC can use
to query the chip. This hardware takes care of one side of the equation (communication with your PC). 
The other side of it would be some dedicated hardware to manage the UART protocol which includes logic,
buffers and line drivers and the sorts. The command set mentioned earlier would be used to read from
or write to the UART hardware. It should probably be mentioned that USB devices are polled by the PC, 
so in instances where you are using code which is event based, your PC is actually doing some polling to
determine that new data has arrived - this may be different than a native serial port, I wouldn't know.

The above logic can be implemented either as a dedicated ASIC or by using a stripped down microcontroller 
core which executes firmware on ROM. If it is indeed a microcontroller core, then I imagine the UART is 
connected to it as a peripheral.
From:
https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/14344/how-does-an-ftdi-chip-work

UART
https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/14344/how-does-an-ftdi-chip-worUART 
stands for Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter. It’s not a communication protocol 
like SPI and I2C, but a physical circuit in a microcontroller, or a stand-alone IC.
A UART’s main purpose is to transmit and receive serial data
From:
http://www.circuitbasics.com/basics-uart-communication/
